---
tags: monkeyman, tools, web, blog
pubDateTime: 2012-02-08
---
#Very First Monkeyman Post Ever

This blog post gives an example how you could use the big monkeyman to
build your blog. Nothing is set in stone, feel free to change it in
any way you like.

##Create a post

First, you need to make sure you have a folder set up with a `source`
and a `layout` directory.

Inside that directory, you create a `1.md` file. You can use another
name for the file, if you feel like it. However, the name is not all
that relevant at all. Eventually, Monkeyman will turn its name into
something sensible, and it will most likely be based on the title of
your resource, which (in case of Markdown files) is based on the first
header found.

To stick with the example, it's probably best to have a markdown file
that looks a little like this:

    # Very First Monkeyman Post Ever
    
    blabla bla bla

If you run `monkeyman generate` in this directory, you will find a
file called `very-first-monkeyman-post-ever.frag` in the target
directory. Upon closer inspection, it turns out it's just an HTML
fragment, not a full HTML file.  In order to turn this into a full
fledged HTML file, you first need to...

##Create a layout

Obviously, you _don't_ want a web site existing of fragments. At the
same time, you want to deal with formatting just once. That's where
layouts come in. A layout is just a template, with some snippets of
code to put the different parts of the underlying resource in the
proper place.

The most basic template could be something like this:

    %html
      %head
        %title= title
      %body
        %h1.title= title
        - unescape(body)

If you put this into a file called `layout.scaml` in the `layout`
directory and run `middleman generate`, you will now have html files
as well. Note that the the path to the file is based on the title.

    <html>
      <head>
         <title>Very First Monkeyman Post Ever</title>
      </head>
      <body>
     ....

By the way, if you have other resources that you want to refer to,
just put them in to the `source` directory as well. Let's do that
quickly, just to proove I'm not lying.

    %html
      %head
        %title= title
        %link(href={uri("css/default.css")} rel="stylesheet" type="text/css")
      %body
        %h1.title= title
        - unescape(body)

So, that's all pretty straightforward. And if you don't fancy a HAML
style of template, then you can just use _SSP_ or _Jade_ as
well. However, just having a simple transformation from Markdown into
HTML doesn't make a blog yet. What if, for instance, we want to
display the tags associated to a post?

##Displaying tags

Inside Monkeyman, _every_ resource has tags associated to it. In
reality, only some files have tags associated to them, but potentially
they _can all_ have tags. (Future versions will have something that
will explain why.)

Currently, the only way to add tags is to use YAML frontmatter. If
you're familiar with Jekyll, then you will know that Jekyll uses YAML
for exactly the same purpose.

YAML frontmatter allows you to prepend the content of your file with a
section with some structured data. In the current version of Monkeyman
(2012-02-07), YAML frontmatter is only extracted from Markdown files.

In our case, if we just prepend the document that we're writing
(`1.md`) with something like this:

    ---
    tags: monkeyman, tools, web
    ---

... then we made sure that the tags _are_ available to the
layout. Tags are automatically made available as page variables in
your layout pages. (Just as quite a few other page variables that you
will find out later on.) Including the tags in your page is therefore
a breeze. We could for instance include all tags automatically at the
bottom of the post by changing the layout we had before into this:

    %html
      %head
        %title= title
        %link(href={uri("css/default.css")} rel="stylesheet" type="text/css")
      %body
        .post
          %h1.title= title
          .body
            - unescape(body)
          .tags
            - for (tag <- tags)
              %span.tag= tag

In that case, the HTML getting generated would have had this at the
bottom of the page:

    ....
    <div class="tags">
      <span class="tag">monkeyman</span>
      <span class="tag">tools</span>
      <span class="tag">web</span>
    </div>

As you can see, styling a page in Monkeyman isn't all that
hard. However, a blog typically exist of more than one post. And I
haven't told you how to organize multiple posts yet. If you're
interested, read on with the next post.






